Copyright (c) 2002-2003 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that:  (1) source code
distributions retain the above copyright notice and this paragraph
in its entirety, (2) distributions including binary code include the
above copyright notice and this paragraph in its entirety in the
documentation or other materials provided with the distribution, and
(3) all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
software display the following acknowledgement:  ``This product
includes software developed by the Harvard University, and its
contributors.'' Neither the name of the University nor the names of
its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
from this software without specific prior written permission.
 
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This is a description of the basic nfsdump trace format.

All numbers are in hex except dates and times (which just look
really odd in hex for some reason).  Also note that file handles are
unparsed; each kind of server has their own way of encoding them and
nfsdump doesn't try to decode any of them.

Each request or response is represented by a single line.  The
response to a call might not immediately follow the call.  In fact,
not all calls have responses at all (we see calls that don't make it
all the way to the server, and some of the responses from the server
die due to network congestion before we see them).

The first eight fields are the same for both calls and responses:

1.  Time (seconds.microseconds) when the packet was seen.

	Due to a misconfiguration of the clock on the EECS lair62
	monitor, sometimes time will suddenly jump backwards for
	five minutes for a few moments.  This seems to happen about
	once a week.  Unfortunately I didn't notice this in time to
	do anything about it.

2.  Source address (iaddr.port)

3.  Destination address (iaddr.port)

4.  Transport protocol (U=udp, T=tcp).  From the original traces
	(2001-2003) the lair packets are UDP and all the FAS packets
	are TCP.

5.  NFS RPC protocol version and direction.  (C3 = nfs v3 call, R3 =
	nfs v3 response, C2 = nfs v2 call, R2 = nfs v2 call).

6.  RPC XID field.

7.  RPC function (numeric value).  This is redundant with field 8.

8.  RPC function (canonical name).  For example, getattr, lookup,
	read, write, ...

For responses only, the ninth field is the return value, which is
	either OK (aka RPC return code 0) or the numeric value if
	non-zero.

Then, there are a bunch of name/value pairs.  The names correspond
to the names of the XDR fields.  For example

	...  ftype 2 mode 1ed nlink 2 ...

Indicates that the ftype field had a value of 2, mode was 1ed, and
nlink was 2.

For situations where there might be more than one instance of the
same structure in a call or response, the names for the second have
a "2" appended.  For example, rename has "fh", "name", "fh2" and
"name2".

For situations where there might be any number of instances of the
same field name (for example, for readdir and readdirp responses),
the names have -%u appended where the value ranges from 0 to N-1
(where N is the number of entries).  [Note:  these fields are
optional and can appear only in versions 1.2.0 or later.]

For responses, the last 10 tokens on each line are debugging info
that you should ignore.  For calls, the last 6 tokens on each line
are debugging info that you should ignore.  (some day we'll delete
this, but doing so will break a million scripts, so it's just not
worth the trouble)

NOTE-- in some very rare cases (and never in the EECS network), a
line will end in the word JUMBO or LONGPACKET.  When this happens,
it indicates that an obscure protocol situation has been detected. 
When this happens, remove this token and then parse the rest of the
line as-is.

A few packets from the fas3/fas4 traces also have the string "SHORT
PACKET" where the response code should be (and sometimes this string
is embedded in other strings).  These packets will not parse
correctly and should be ignored.

KNOWN BUGS:

- In early traces, the acc field in NFSv3 access calls was written
	as a single letter (X for execute, R for read, etc).  This
	didn't work when there was more than one bit set in the acc
	field!

	Recent traces use a hex number to print the bits from the
	call.

- In some traces, the size field of the NFSv3 setattr calls were
	written in wrong-endian format:  the hi and low 32 bits were
	exchanged.  The only way to recognize this is that the size
	is gigantic, and ends (usually) in 7 or 8 zeros.

	This was fixed in the collector 9/9/03 so future traces
	should be correct.

